#summary The JCatapult Ant java plugin

= Introduction =

This plugin provides applications with the ability compile Java source code into Java byte code .class files. This plugin also provides applications the ability to create JAR files from the compiled source code and publish these JAR files into the local Savant repository for other projects to use.

This plugin contains two files that should be imported like this:

{{{
<import file="${ant.home}/plugins-jcatapult/java/1.0/compile.xml"/>
<import file="${ant.home}/plugins-jcatapult/java/1.0/jar.xml"/>
}}}

= Targets =

The plugin provides these targets:

== compile ==

Compiles the Java main and test source files into the _target/classes_ output directories. This calls _compile-main_, _compile-test-unit_ and _compile-test-integration_ in turn.

== compile-main ==

Compiles the Java main source files into the _target/classes/main_ output directories. This also copies configuration from the _src/conf/main_ directory into the _target/classes/main_ directory. Lastly, this also copies any non-Java source file from the _src/java/main_ directory into the _target/classes/main_ directory.

== compile-test-unit ==

Compiles the Java unit test source files into the _target/classes/test/unit_ output directory. This also copies configuration from the _src/conf/test/unit_ directory into the _target/classes/test/unit_ directory. Lastly, this also copies any non-Java source file from the _src/java/test/unit_ directory into the _target/classes/test/unit_ directory.

== compile-test-integration ==

Compiles the Java integration test source files into the _target/classes/test/integration_ output directory. This also copies configuration from the _src/conf/test/integration_ directory into the _target/classes/test/integration_ directory. Lastly, this also copies any non-Java source file from the _src/java/test/integration_ directory into the _target/classes/test/integration_ directory.

== jar ==

Creates the project JAR file based on the contents of the _target/classes/main_ directory and places it into the _target/jars_ directory. This also produces the source JAR file.