#summary Creating a Web Application

= Web Applications =

At the core of JCatapult is support for building web applications. JCatapult provides a number of tools to make building Java web applications fast and simple. JCatapult web applications will normally consist of these types of classes and resources:

  * Entity classes
  * Service classes
  * Action classes
  * Views (JSPs or FreeMarker templates)
  * Images
  * Cascading Style Scripts
  * JavaScript
  * etc...

= Webapp Creation =
== `make-project script' ==
Depending on your operating system, run the appropriate _make-project_ script below to create a new webapp. 

Creating a webapp on Windows:
{{{
%JCATAPULT_HOME%\ant\tools\makeproject\make-project.bat create-webapp
}}}

Creating a webapp on Linux/Mac:
{{{
$JCATAPULT_HOME/ant/tools/makeproject/make-project.bat create-webapp
}}}

*It's recommended that you add the `JCATAPULT_HOME/ant/tools/makeproject` directory to your path to simplify execution.*

This script also has a simple help menu that provides basic instructions on how to use the script.

To access the help menu, execute the following:

Windows:
{{{
%JCATAPULT_HOME%\ant\tools\makeproject\make-project.bat help
}}}

Linux/Mac
{{{
$JCATAPULT_HOME/ant/tools/makeproject/make-project help
}}}


*NOTE: Linux and Mac users might be required to set execute permissions to the make-project script.  An example command has been given below that should appropriately set the execute flag for the user if necessary.

{{{
chmod u+x $JCATAPULT_HOME/ant/tools/makeproject/make-project
}}}

== Interaction ==
When you execute the `make-project create-webapp` script, you will be asked the following questions:

  # Project Name:  Enter the name of your project (e.g. jcatapult-example-webapp)
  # Creation Directory:  Enter the directory to create the project in. (e.g. win: C:\projects, linux/mac: ~/projects)
  # Package Name: The java package root (e.g. org.jcatapult.example.webapp)
  # Group:  This is the group that owns the webapp.  This is typically the company domain name (e.g. jcatapult.org)


= Building the Webapp =
After you answer all the questions, you should have a newly created web application. This webapp can be built using the following command from within your newly created project root directory:

{{{
ant clean app
}}}

Once the webapp has been compiled, you can run the webapp inside Tomcat by executing the Tomcat scripts located in `target/tomcat/bin` like this:

Linux/Mac
{{{
target/tomcat/bin/tomcat.sh run
}}}

Windows
{{{
target\tomcat\bin\tomcat.bat run
}}}

Now you should be able to access the newly created webapp in a browser via http://localhost:8080